title: "What's your startup's null hypothesis?"
date: "22/03/2012"
body: |

  I've realised that without an experimental control, any 'test' I do of my startup ideas is invalid. It's incredibly easy to get people to say something is a good idea - first because of politeness, second because it's costly not to do so, third because no idea you come up with is going to be obviously worse than existing products.
  
  ## Why people always say 'that's a good idea'
  
  ### Politeness
  
  People are naturally very polite. Saying nice things is extremely easy, good for getting people to like you, and makes you feel good. When someone asks you for feedback, it's very much the default option as it's beneficial to them.
  
  ### Costs of criticism
  
  Explaning why you don't like something is both an immediate and long term cost. 
  
  First you have to think hard about your reasons and work out how to say them in a way that doesn't cause offence. Thinking about a business idea takes time, and could require market knowledge. Is someone going to risk looking stupid by ad-libbing a criticism?
  
  Secondly, even if you come up with a valid-sounding criticism you'll likely upset that person. 
  
  Further, by criticising you've issued them a challenge to prove you wrong. If you say bad things about an idea and it works, the proponent will want to make you pay. Conversely, if you had said nice things and it fails anyway, their ego is equally at stake - they're not going to hunt you down and point out your error.
  
  ### Nobody comes up with obviously bad ideas
  
  Finally - no idea you're likely to come up with would be, on the surface, bad. "A better mousetrap" is a classic non-business. Anyone could fix an aspect of a mousetrap, explain this fix to someone and have that person say, "Yes, it is a better mousetrap".
  
  The fatal flaw, however, is that it's not enough of an improvement to be a business. It needs to be _so good_ it overcomes the various switching costs, (for a start making people spend their valuable time learning about it), the costs of acquisition, perhaps even the additional cost from its manufacturing. "Good ideas" are easy. Businesses are not.
  
  ## "That's a good idea" is worthless
  
  So with the above it's clear that "That's a good idea" is a null signal. It convays 0 information about whether your startup idea is a business beacuse the null case, a non-business, will elicit the same signal.
  
  ### What to look for instead 
  
  Non-null signals are those are close as possible to the actual business situation - ideally paying money. Any cost is good though - if you've imposed a cost on people which they willingly undergo to access your startup's value proposition, you've already created some value for them.
  
  Concretely - an email signup form is a reasonable signal, a fake payment page is better (in a sense, you've already taken 'perception of likihood of payment * amount of payment' from people).
  
  Just like a scientist, if you're testing a business idea you need learn to tell real signals from junk.
